---
author: David Minkley
date: 2019-10-14
---
<div class="a-lot-of-text">

## Research Interests

I am interested in bioinformatics, the application of computational methods to addressing questions in biology.  As part of Dr. Ben Koop's lab at the [University of Victoria](https://https://www.uvic.ca/), this has involved developing publicly-available genomic resources for salmonids (Atlantic salmon, arctic charr, rainbow trout, and the Pacific salmonids) as well as for Northern pike, a close relative of these species.  Resources I have helped develop include chromosome-scale reference genome assemblies, transcriptomes, SNP arrays and libraries of repeated DNA sequences.  The process of creating each of these can be complex, and frequently presents hurdles which I find fascinating to explore and overcome.  Finding solutions to bioinformatics problems requires a combination of biological insight, computer programming, trial and error, and tradeoffs which weigh computational limitations against further development.  I enjoy problem-solving in this space during a time of 'big data' when the understanding and capabilities of the field are expanding very quickly.

### Transposable elements

Transposable elements (TEs) are DNA sequences which facilitate their own movement from one place in the genome to another.  Analagous to a 'genomic parasite' and found in nearly all living organisms, over time TEs can grow to very large numbers and often represent the largest fraction of their host genome (e.g. at least 50% of the human genome is derived from TEs).  Early work indicated that salmonids were host to a number of recently-active TE families, and over the course of my Masters research I established that repeated DNA (the majority of which is from TEs) makes up close to 60% of the genomes of rainbow trout, Atlantic salmon, arctic char, coho salmon and chinook salmon.  This is amongst the highest proportion that has been reported for any animal.  Further to this, I followed up on early indications of horizontal transfer of TEs between salmonid ancestors and other species, and found that many prolific TEs of the Tc1-Mariner superfamily showed evidence of having recently arived *de novo* in the genome of ancestral salmonids.  Some such horizontal transfers appear to have occurred since the divergence of salmonid lineages, a finding which implies that different lineages are host to different prolifically-replicating elements.  I found a TE family in rainbow trout, for example, which on its own occupies more than 2% of the genome and which is seemingly absent from another salmonid, arctic charr.  Building on these findings, [a large effort](https://cigene.no/uncategorized/transpose/) is currently underway to further characterize and study TEs in salmon, and investigate how they relate to an evolutionarily important whole-genome duplication event experienced in the common ancestor of all salmon species.

For more on transposable elements in salmon, [view my Master's thesis here](http://dspace.library.uvic.ca/handle/1828/9287).

### Population genomics of salmonids

The decreasing cost of DNA sequencing has recently enabled large-scale whole-genome resequencing (WGS) projects in a number of species, including salmon.  In these studies, the entire genome of many individual salmon are sequenced and aligned to a reference genome, from which genetic variation can be characterized.  An analysis of patterns presented by such genetic variation can provide insights into the demographic makeup, population structure, selective pressures and recent evolutionary history of the populations involved.  I am currently investigating the population structure of rainbow trout throughout British Columbia, Canada using WGS data, and am particularly interested in the genetic groupings which have formed since the retreat of glaciers at the end of the last ice age.  I am also involved in collaborations which are using WGS data to identify genetic variants in cutthroat troat as well as chinook, sockeye and coho salmon.

</div>